README.md, before:

# Trail

Trail is an Obsidian plugin for adding named relations between notes and traversing them through a dedicated pane.

**[Documentation](https://theoryzhenkov.github.io/trail/)** · [Getting Started](https://theoryzhenkov.github.io/trail/getting-started/) · [Examples](https://theoryzhenkov.github.io/trail/examples/) · [Support](https://buymeacoffee.com/theoryzhenkov)

## Features

- Inline typed relations using a concise `::` syntax.
- Frontmatter relations via `relations` map and `relations.<type>` properties.
- Implied relations with forward/reverse/both/sibling direction rules.
- Hierarchy view to browse all ancestors of the active note.

## Inline syntax

Single relation per link, prefix or suffix:

- `up::[[Parent]]`
- `[[Child]]::down`

## Frontmatter relations

Map format:

```yaml
relations:
  up: "[[Parent]]"
  down:
    - "Child A"
    - "[[Child B]]"
```

Dot property format:

```yaml
relations.up: "[[Parent]]"
```

## Implied relations

In **Settings → Trail**, add implied relation rules:

- Base relation
- Implied relation
- Direction: `forward`, `reverse`, `both`, or `sibling`

Examples:

- `up -> parent (forward)` makes `A -up-> B` imply `A -parent-> B`
- `up -> parent (reverse)` makes `A -up-> B` imply `B -parent-> A`
- `up -> sibling (sibling)` makes notes sharing the same target siblings of each other

## Using the Trail pane

- Open with the **Trail: Open pane** command.
- Use **Trail: Refresh graph** to rebuild all relations.
- Filter which relation types to include using the filter button.
- Browse the full ancestor chain of the active note.

## Installation

### Install via BRAT

1. Install the [BRAT plugin](https://github.com/TfTHacker/obsidian42-brat) from **Settings → Community plugins**.
2. Enable BRAT.
3. Open BRAT settings and select **Add Beta plugin**.
4. Enter `https://github.com/theoryzhenkov/trail` and select **Add Plugin**.
5. Enable Trail in **Settings → Community plugins**.

### Manual install

Copy `main.js`, `styles.css`, `manifest.json` to:

```
<Vault>/.obsidian/plugins/trail/
```

## Development

```bash
npm install
npm run dev
```

## Support

If you find Trail useful, consider [buying me a coffee](https://buymeacoffee.com/theoryzhenkov).

Commit message:

docs: add beta warning to README.md

README.md, after:

> [!WARNING]
> This plugin is currently in **beta**. Breaking changes may occur between versions without prior notice.

# Trail

Trail is an Obsidian plugin for adding named relations between notes and traversing them through a dedicated pane.

**[Documentation](https://theoryzhenkov.github.io/trail/)** · [Getting Started](https://theoryzhenkov.github.io/trail/getting-started/) · [Examples](https://theoryzhenkov.github.io/trail/examples/) · [Support](https://buymeacoffee.com/theoryzhenkov)

## Features

- Inline typed relations using a concise `::` syntax.
- Frontmatter relations via `relations` map and `relations.<type>` properties.
- Implied relations with forward/reverse/both/sibling direction rules.
- Hierarchy view to browse all ancestors of the active note.

## Inline syntax

Single relation per link, prefix or suffix:

- `up::[[Parent]]`
- `[[Child]]::down`

## Frontmatter relations

Map format:

```yaml
relations:
  up: "[[Parent]]"
  down:
    - "Child A"
    - "[[Child B]]"
```

Dot property format:

```yaml
relations.up: "[[Parent]]"
```

## Implied relations

In **Settings → Trail**, add implied relation rules:

- Base relation
- Implied relation
- Direction: `forward`, `reverse`, `both`, or `sibling`

Examples:

- `up -> parent (forward)` makes `A -up-> B` imply `A -parent-> B`
- `up -> parent (reverse)` makes `A -up-> B` imply `B -parent-> A`
- `up -> sibling (sibling)` makes notes sharing the same target siblings of each other

## Using the Trail pane

- Open with the **Trail: Open pane** command.
- Use **Trail: Refresh graph** to rebuild all relations.
- Filter which relation types to include using the filter button.
- Browse the full ancestor chain of the active note.

## Installation

### Install via BRAT

1. Install the [BRAT plugin](https://github.com/TfTHacker/obsidian42-brat) from **Settings → Community plugins**.
2. Enable BRAT.
3. Open BRAT settings and select **Add Beta plugin**.
4. Enter `https://github.com/theoryzhenkov/trail` and select **Add Plugin**.
5. Enable Trail in **Settings → Community plugins**.

### Manual install

Copy `main.js`, `styles.css`, `manifest.json` to:

```
<Vault>/.obsidian/plugins/trail/
```

## Development

```bash
npm install
npm run dev
```

## Support

If you find Trail useful, consider [buying me a coffee](https://buymeacoffee.com/theoryzhenkov).
