docs/configuration/groups.md, before:

# Groups

Groups organize relations in the Trail pane. Instead of a flat list of all connections, you see organized sections like "Ancestors", "Children", and "Siblings"—each with its own configuration for what to show and how.

!!! tip "Power User Option"
    For advanced group configuration with rich filtering, date arithmetic, and complex expressions, see the [Trail Query Language (TQL)](../syntax/query.md).

---

## Creating a Group

1. Open **Settings → Trail**
2. In the **Groups** section, click **Add group**
3. Configure the group settings

---

## Group Settings

### Name

The label displayed in the Trail pane. Choose something descriptive:

- "Ancestors"
- "Project Tasks"
- "References"
- "Related Notes"

---

### Members

Members define which relations appear in this group and how they're traversed.

Each member has three settings:

#### Relation

Which relation type to include. Select from your defined relations.

#### Depth

How many levels to traverse:

| Depth | Behavior |
|-------|----------|
| `0` | Unlimited—follow the chain as far as it goes |
| `1` | Direct connections only |
| `2` | Direct connections + one level deeper |
| `n` | Up to n levels |

**Example:** With `up` at depth 0, if your note links up to a parent, which links up to a grandparent, which links up to a great-grandparent—you see all of them.

With `up` at depth 1, you only see the direct parent.

#### Extend

Optionally continue traversal using another group's configuration.

**Use case:** The default "Siblings" group extends from "Ancestors":

1. First, find notes via `next` and `prev` (depth 1)
2. Then, for each sibling found, apply the "Ancestors" group's traversal

This lets you see siblings' context without redefining the traversal rules.

---

## Default Groups

Trail includes three groups out of the box:

### Ancestors

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `up` | 0 (unlimited) |

Shows the full chain of parent notes above the current note.

### Children

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `down` | 0 (unlimited) |

Shows all descendant notes below the current note.

### Siblings

| Member | Depth | Extend |
|--------|-------|--------|
| `next` | 1 | Ancestors |
| `prev` | 1 | Ancestors |

Shows notes linked via `next`/`prev`, then shows their ancestry for context.

---

## Multiple Members

Groups can include multiple relation types:

**Group: "Project Context"**

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `project` | 0 |
| `milestone` | 1 |
| `related` | 1 |

This shows:

- All projects up the chain (unlimited)
- Direct milestone connections
- Direct related notes

All combined in one section.

---

## Visual Direction and Groups

The relations' visual direction affects how the group renders:

### Ascending Relations

For `up`-style relations (visual direction = ascending), Trail inverts the tree so the deepest ancestor appears at the root:

```
▼ Ancestors
  up  Great-Grandparent
    up  Grandparent
      up  Parent
```

### Descending Relations

For `down`-style relations (visual direction = descending), the tree shows direct connections at the root:

```
▼ Children
  down  Child A
    down  Grandchild A1
    down  Grandchild A2
  down  Child B
```

### Sequential Relations

For `next`/`prev` relations (visual direction = sequential), items appear in a flat sorted list:

```
▼ Siblings
  prev  Previous Note
  next  Next Note
```

---

## Managing Groups

### Reordering

Groups appear in the Trail pane in the order they're configured. Use the arrow buttons to reorder.

### Deleting

1. Expand the group section
2. Click **Delete group**

---

## Examples

### Academic Paper Hierarchy

**Group: "Paper Context"**

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `field` | 0 |
| `topic` | 2 |

Shows the research field hierarchy and immediate topic context.

---

### Project Management

**Group: "Project Hierarchy"**

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `project` | 0 |
| `epic` | 1 |

**Group: "Task Children"**

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `subtask` | 0 |
| `blocks` | 1 |

Separate groups for looking up vs looking down.

---

### Daily Notes Sequence

**Group: "Timeline"**

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `next` | 3 |
| `prev` | 3 |

Shows three days forward and back, not the entire timeline.

---

## Best Practices

### One Purpose Per Group

Each group should answer one question:

- "What contains this note?" → Ancestors
- "What does this note contain?" → Children
- "What's related to this note?" → Related

Don't cram everything into one group.

### Use Depth Limits

Unlimited depth (0) is useful for hierarchies, but can be overwhelming for other relations. Start with depth 1-2 and increase if needed.

### Order Groups by Importance

Put the most useful groups first. You'll see them without scrolling.

### Use Extend Sparingly

Extend is powerful but can create complex traversals. Make sure you understand what it does before using it.

### Consider TQL for Complex Groups

If you need advanced filtering (date ranges, complex boolean logic, regex matching), consider using the [Trail Query Language](../syntax/query.md) instead of the visual editor.

Commit message:

docs: add maintainter documentation with README and AGENTS and update docs

docs/configuration/groups.md, after:

# Groups

Groups organize relations in the Trail pane. Instead of a flat list of all connections, you see organized sections like "Ancestors", "Children", and "Siblings"—each with its own configuration for what to show and how.

!!! tip "Power User Option"
    For advanced group configuration with rich filtering, date arithmetic, and complex expressions, see the [Trail Query Language (TQL)](../syntax/query.md).

---

## Creating a Group

1. Open **Settings → Trail**
2. In the **Groups** section, click **Add group**
3. Configure the group settings

---

## Group Settings

### Name

The label displayed in the Trail pane. Choose something descriptive:

- "Ancestors"
- "Project Tasks"
- "References"
- "Related Notes"

---

### Members

Members define which relations appear in this group and how they're traversed.

Each member has three settings:

#### Relation

Which relation type to include. Select from your defined relations.

#### Depth

How many levels to traverse:

| Depth | Behavior |
|-------|----------|
| `0` | Unlimited—follow the chain as far as it goes |
| `1` | Direct connections only |
| `2` | Direct connections + one level deeper |
| `n` | Up to n levels |

**Example:** With `up` at depth 0, if your note links up to a parent, which links up to a grandparent, which links up to a great-grandparent—you see all of them.

With `up` at depth 1, you only see the direct parent.

#### Extend

Optionally continue traversal using another group's configuration.

**Use case:** The default "Siblings" group extends from "Ancestors":

1. First, find notes via `next` and `prev` (depth 1)
2. Then, for each sibling found, apply the "Ancestors" group's traversal

This lets you see siblings' context without redefining the traversal rules.

!!! tip "TQL Equivalent"
    In [TQL queries](../syntax/query.md), use the chaining operator (`>>`) with a group reference: `from next >> @"Ancestors"`

---

## Default Groups

Trail includes three groups out of the box:

### Ancestors

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `up` | 0 (unlimited) |

Shows the full chain of parent notes above the current note.

### Children

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `down` | 0 (unlimited) |

Shows all descendant notes below the current note.

### Siblings

| Member | Depth | Extend |
|--------|-------|--------|
| `next` | 1 | Ancestors |
| `prev` | 1 | Ancestors |

Shows notes linked via `next`/`prev`, then shows their ancestry for context.

---

## Multiple Members

Groups can include multiple relation types:

**Group: "Project Context"**

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `project` | 0 |
| `milestone` | 1 |
| `related` | 1 |

This shows:

- All projects up the chain (unlimited)
- Direct milestone connections
- Direct related notes

All combined in one section.

---

## Visual Direction and Groups

The relations' visual direction affects how the group renders:

### Ascending Relations

For `up`-style relations (visual direction = ascending), Trail inverts the tree so the deepest ancestor appears at the root:

```
▼ Ancestors
  up  Great-Grandparent
    up  Grandparent
      up  Parent
```

### Descending Relations

For `down`-style relations (visual direction = descending), the tree shows direct connections at the root:

```
▼ Children
  down  Child A
    down  Grandchild A1
    down  Grandchild A2
  down  Child B
```

### Sequential Relations

For `next`/`prev` relations (visual direction = sequential), items appear in a flat sorted list:

```
▼ Siblings
  prev  Previous Note
  next  Next Note
```

---

## Managing Groups

### Reordering

Groups appear in the Trail pane in the order they're configured. Use the arrow buttons to reorder.

### Deleting

1. Expand the group section
2. Click **Delete group**

---

## Examples

### Academic Paper Hierarchy

**Group: "Paper Context"**

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `field` | 0 |
| `topic` | 2 |

Shows the research field hierarchy and immediate topic context.

---

### Project Management

**Group: "Project Hierarchy"**

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `project` | 0 |
| `epic` | 1 |

**Group: "Task Children"**

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `subtask` | 0 |
| `blocks` | 1 |

Separate groups for looking up vs looking down.

---

### Daily Notes Sequence

**Group: "Timeline"**

| Member | Depth |
|--------|-------|
| `next` | 3 |
| `prev` | 3 |

Shows three days forward and back, not the entire timeline.

---

## Best Practices

### One Purpose Per Group

Each group should answer one question:

- "What contains this note?" → Ancestors
- "What does this note contain?" → Children
- "What's related to this note?" → Related

Don't cram everything into one group.

### Use Depth Limits

Unlimited depth (0) is useful for hierarchies, but can be overwhelming for other relations. Start with depth 1-2 and increase if needed.

### Order Groups by Importance

Put the most useful groups first. You'll see them without scrolling.

### Use Extend Sparingly

Extend is powerful but can create complex traversals. Make sure you understand what it does before using it.

### Consider TQL for Complex Groups

If you need advanced filtering (date ranges, complex boolean logic, regex matching), consider using the [Trail Query Language](../syntax/query.md) instead of the visual editor.
